Here's what we wanna try to solve first.
When you go to a new form,
what do we typically wanna do?
We want to autofocus on the first
text input, that's fairly common.
But the question of course is,
how do we do that thing?
And so typically what you might do
is you might throw an autofocus on
the development, that sometimes works, but
then we know that with JavaScript loading
and stuff, things get a little bit funky.
So what we're gonna learn right now
is how to actually add autofocus
to forms in a way that is consistent and
works.
What we want is the name to be
the first thing that we focus on.
And so the thing about reactive references
is that they work both in the data
context, and
they work in the template context.
So in other words, if we want an actual
HTML element to be a reference,
we just tell it what the reference
is going to be called.
So in this case,
I usually like to preface any element
that's gonna be an actual element with EL.
So this is kind of back to the jQuery
days where you might prefix it with
a dollar symbol, I just prefer
to keep it consistent that way.
And then I'll call this NameInput,
for example.
And the way this works is up here
inside of our reactive data though,
we do you need to define it though.
And how do we define that?
Well, we have this element
called NameInput, and
it's going to be a reactive reference,
just like the ref is in the template.
But we can actually tell it that it's
going to be an HTMLInputElement.
Or we can say it's, I think null is
the one that's typically an option.
Because here's the thing, when JavaScript
is loading, this thing does not exist, so
it has to be able to be null.
However, we do know once it's loaded,
it will basically put
an input element in there.
And so that's why, believe it or
not, that's all it takes for
this thing to exist.
So if I log right now, log, whoops,
that was the wrong, elNameInput, save it.
So you'll see that if
I go to the new page.
You'll see that it's already
fetching that input automatically.
I don't have to go on mounted,
check to see if that element exists,
assign it to the ref,
just it's there, it works.
And that's kind of a little bit of
the magic sprinkling that Vue does for
us by assigning that ref to here.
So it looks to map those two things.
So that's a key thing to understand.
Okay, now that we have this, we can say
when everything has been mounted properly,
so we'll call our onMounted
life cycle hook, there we go.
So when you have it mounted, your initial
thought is probably going to say, okay,
well I have NameInput, and
I'm just gonna run focus on it.
But as we see here, TypeScript
is yelling at us because, again,
we've said that it might be null,
it might not be defined.
So what I tried to do earlier here is I
was, okay, well, we can check, right?
You typically would say, if it exists,
then just run this thing.
But it's kind of being finicky because
I think it's either the way the HTML
element is being populated,
like truthy value.
So the way this actually works is you
actually wanna provide a question
mark at it.
So we wanna actually unpack the value,
cuz don't forget,
element name input is
a reactive reference.
It's still a reactive reference, even
though it's referring to a div element.
But more importantly this value here,
it could be null.
So by putting the question mark here, I
wanna say this is just vanilla JavaScript.
Basically optional chaining,
checks to make sure this thing is
valid before doing the next thing.
Although it makes me wonder now real
quick, I wanna test this cuz if
elNameInput.value, would
that have done it?
That works too.
So that's the key.
So this is where the unwrapping,
that's why I say I wanted people to get
used to seeing that, is because it's
easy to forget this, to be honest.
And so I was just like, yeah, it's
definitely elName value, no it's .value,
this works.
But I gotta say, there is
something clean about just saying,
whenever this thing is available,
just use it.
So the optional chain here is
a pretty nice solution for this.
Now, when we refresh the page and go to
new, you can see, automatically focused.